[Music]
welcome to topcast
part two of chapter 16 of the beginning
of infinity
the evolution of creativity and last
time i did very little reading i think
it was a record i think i got through
uh just a little over one page which is
uh
i don't know if that's good or bad some
people seem to like the comments some
people
um like the comments and the reading to
be put together
so today we'll do a little more reading
and some commentary as well
and try and get through a more
substantial part of this chapter
so without further ado let me go back to
the book
and david writes i'm on page two quote
creativity would have been even less
noticeable in the predecessor of our
species
yet it must already have been evolving
in that species
or ours would never have been the result
in fact the advantage conferred by
successive mutations that gave our
predecessors brain slightly more
creativity
or more precisely more of the ability
that we would now think of as creativity
must have been quite large for by all
accounts modern humans evolved from
ape-like ancestors very rapidly by gene
evolution standards
our ancestors must have been continually
out-breeding their cousins
moreover during the period when
creativity was evolving
the ability to replicate memes was
evolving too it is believed that some
members of the species homo erectus
living
500 000 years ago knew how to make
campfires
that knowledge was in their means not
their genes and
once creativity and meme transmission
are both present they greatly enhance
each other's evolutionary value for then
anyone who improves something
also has the means to bequeath the
invention to all future generations
thus multiplying the benefit to the
relevant genes
and memes can be improved much faster by
creativity than by random trial and
error
since there is no upper limit to the
value of ideas the conditions would have
been there for a runaway coevolution
between the two adaptations creativity
and the ability to use means
pause down my reflection so we've got a
couple of things here one is that
these pre-homo sapien species
that have existed on the earth have done
so for a long time
it depends upon how you count what a
human species is
but i was looking at this question about
what counts as human earlier today now
when
humans first of all it depends on what
you mean by human
is a human a homo sapien or any kind of
uh sort of hominid that is able to
creatively explain the world around us a
universal explainer
now in a recent podcast that i made
almost simultaneously with this i was
talking about the possibility of alien
life
and whether or not here on earth
the intelligent hominids homo erectus is
one perhaps neanderthal was another
homo sapien certainly us perhaps all of
these had a common ancestor the first
creative thinking ape of a kind and that
first creative thinking ape of a kind
i'm guessing was a universal explainer i
don't know
but uh you know i i kind of am with the
sentiments that are
kind of expressed in the beginning
affinity which i also mentioned in the
last episode that maybe it all came
along in the one go
this creative capacity to explain the
world
it wasn't there previously and then
some individual had a mutation
which enabled a genetic mutation which
enabled it to explain the world around
it
to explain not merely react to the world
around it
and that was the first universal
explainer and it had an advantage it had
an advantage and so it had
more offspring some of those whom
presumably maybe all of them had the
capacity to
explain the world around it to think
creatively to think better
than the other um members of its
species although it probably would have
been a new species by now right it's
hard to
know in biology how speciation
kind of happens like how do you draw the
line between one species another well
this
might be a way okay if a human
of a kind a universal explainer of a
kind is that
categorically different to the thing
that it evolved from and the thing that
it evolved from
didn't have the capacity to creatively
explain the world and then
its offspring did then that's a that's a
sharp dividing line between these two
kinds of creatures but when was the
first of these kind of creatures this
first
human type creature as well you know i
know it's not the source of all wisdom
but wikipedia puts the hominids back
at six million years but it calls the
first kind of human
homo habilis 2.5 million years ago
and homo erectus came after that and
then there are various other homeless
species
leading to us homo sapiens which the
um the estimates vary but it could be as
much as
eight hundred thousand years ago homo
sapiens came along
now why would the first universal
explainer
branch off into different species well
again this is purely
my conjecture well it could happen the
same way that any other kind of
evolution happens
this first universal explainer has
children
they have children and so on we end up
with a big tribe eventually the tribe
gets
very very big and splits into two
factions which
don't like one another become hostile to
one another and so they spread apart
a long long way apart for a long long
time they
exist separately they are separated
perhaps by a river
perhaps by a mountain range who knows
what they evolved in africa they all
evolved in africa they might have been
separated
by a long way for a long time and
eventually became two different species
is how speciation happens
and perhaps even those two species
themselves split into various species
and you could have ended up with
lots of different human species all of
whom are able to think creatively
none of whom are actually using the
creativity for anything particularly
interesting
or useful as david will come to but
nonetheless they're different
human species with the ability to
universally explain
the world to be actually people they are
actually people
but only one of them survived through to
today homo sapiens
why well we can talk about that okay and
let's
maybe get back to the book otherwise i
will end up going on a long time like
last time and we won't get through
enough of this chapter which is i
suppose too interesting not to discuss
but let's go back to the book and now
we're just skipping
a bit there where david simply talks
about how
these uh early people just aren't making
much progress
they're not making much progress i urge
you to read the chapter because i won't
read the entire chapter
so i'm picking it up later in david
rights their ability so these early
people's ability to innovate was
increasing rapidly but they were barely
innovating this is a puzzle not because
it is odd behavior but because if
innovation was that rare how could there
have been a differential effect
on the reproduction of individuals with
more or less ability to innovate
that there were thousands of years
between noticeable changes presumably
means
that in most generations even the most
creative individuals
in the population would not have been
making many innovations
hence their greater ability to innovate
would have caused no selection pressure
in their favor
why did tiny improvements in that
ability keep spreading rapidly through
population
our ancestors must have been using their
creativity and using it to which limits
and frequently for something but
evidently
not for innovation what else could it be
used for
pause there just my emphasis here so
what
david is saying is
that we have these people these people
who can innovate
they've got the capacity to create they
are
their memes are evolving as well so
they've got a combination of things some
some useful memes perhaps and probably
yes less useful names
and an ability to create but they're not
innovating not creating new technologies
they're not
improving their lot in life at all but
they are nonetheless
using creativity they have to have been
using the creativity
but nothing's improving what the heck's
going on
if you've been listening to this series
and you've been reading the book along
with me
you'll know the answer you'll know the
answer but before we get to the answer
david's going to say a little bit about
what the answer might not be
and he writes one theory is that it did
not evolve to provide any functional
advantage
but merely through sexual selection
people used it to create displays to
attract mates
colorful clothing decoration
storytelling wit and the like
a preference to mate with the
individuals with the most creative
displays
co-evolved with the creativity to meet
that preference in an evolutionary
spiral
so the theory goes just like peahen's
preference for peacock's tales
but creativity is an unlikely target for
sexual selection
it is a sophisticated adaptation which
to this day we are unable to reproduce
artificially
so it is presumably much harder to
evolve than attributes like
coloration or the size and shape of body
parts some of which it is thought did
indeed evolve by
sexual selection in humans and many
other animals creativity as far as we
know
evolved only once
moreover its most visible effects are
cumulative it would be hard to detect
small variations in the creativity of
potential mates on any one occasion
especially if that creativity
was not being used for practical
purposes consider how hard it would be
today
to detect tiny genetic differences in
people's artistic abilities
by means of an art competition in
practice any such differences would be
swamped by other factors
pause there my reflection and comments
there is a single sentence there
which i emphasized which i think many
people would perhaps skip over but which
i
take to heart where david writes
creativity as far as we know evolved
only once
if that's true and it may or may not be
wow wow because if it did happen then
you can consult my recent episode about
alien life um
are we alone where i mention an academic
so if you're not going to listen to it
i'll mention it now
it kind of steals the thunder from the
other episode but oh well that other
academic is
peter slozak so um he's a philosopher
and basically he agrees he agrees that
maybe
something like creativity human
creativity evolved only once here on the
planet
which means it's not a convergent
feature of evolution which means it's
not
arising here there and everywhere like
you know
wings do you know birds have wings
insects have wings certain kinds of
mammals have wings even fish have wings
so
wings evolve right commonly to fill a
niche
in the environment in a habitat but this
creativity doesn't seem to
it's evolved once why who knows maybe
it's just a quirky thing and
it will never evolve again it's just a
one in a
trillion trillion trillion trillion
trillion you know chance now if you
think that that can't be the case well
just think about the fact that there
appears to have evolved only once
and if you trace backwards in time
the fact that it evolved only once all
the way back to bacteria so there's a
sequence of evolutionary steps that have
led from
bacteria the simplest life that we know
of through to humans the most
complicated
sort of life form that we know of
imagine there's only 100 steps but of
course there's more than 100 steps
and imagine each of those steps only has
a 1 in 10 chance of occurring then
you've got a 1 in 10 to the power of 100
chance of repeating that sequence of
evolutionary steps in order to get to
creativity
because it apparently is what is
required in order to produce the
creativity
i lost my microphone there that
apparently is what is required
in order to evolve creativity
this unique set of steps it appears to
be unique you know
if it wasn't unique then it should have
appeared other places
at other times independently so if it is
unique and there if there is only one
route there or a very very limited
number of routes in order to get
to evolution in order to get to
creativity
given the precursor of bacteria
okay and then the steps going through
more and more complicated life forms
until you get to a human
i am belaboring the point but the reason
i mentioned it here is it comes to bear
on that
alien life question because if it is
truly unique then it is truly unique and
it wouldn't matter how many planets
you've got out there seeded with
bacteria none of them are going to
evolve
creativity and that's why we're alone
that's the simple answer to the fermi
paradox now
as i said in the other episode as well i
don't believe that
but that's not to say that i believe
there are aliens out there either i
don't believe either of those things i
don't believe there are aliens i don't
believe there
aren't aliens i have no strong
views on the matter in any way i just
know that each of these
different ways of looking at the
question are criticisms of each other
and they all seem good in many ways and
until
we have more evidence more interesting
problems out there to solve in respect
with respect to this question um there's
not much to say well
i guess there's a lot to say there's
nothing to say
in terms of our knowledge of exactly
what's going on there's just a lot of
unknowns lots and lots of unknowns
and it's very interesting unknowns with
some interesting arguments but
very little knowledge and certainly no
reason to believe
any of these particular competing
conceptions
or ideas about alien life and if you're
interested in
this question of alien life which comes
to bear on this particular thing here
whether or not creativity will evolve
elsewhere in the universe
then yes my other episode um you know
released
maybe not necessarily alongside this one
but close to this one is
perhaps worth listening to or of
interest to you okay let's get back to
the book
skipping a little bit and david goes on
to say a more plausible variant of the
sexual selection theory is that people
choose mates according to social status
rather than favoring creativity directly
perhaps the most creative individuals
were able to gain status
more effectively through intrigue or
other social manipulation
this could have given them an
evolutionary advantage without producing
any progress which we would see
evidence of however all such theories
still
face the problem of explaining why if
creativity was being used intensively
for any purpose
it was not also used for functional
purposes why would a chief who had
gained power through creative intrigue
not be thinking about better spears for
hunting why wouldn't a subordinate who
invented such a thing have been favored
similarly wouldn't potential mates who
are impressed by artistic displays
also have been impressed by practical
innovations in any case
some practical innovations would
themselves have helped the discoveries
to produce better displays
and innovations sometimes have reached a
new skill of making
a string of decorative beads in one
generation might become the skill
of making a slingshot in the next so why
were practical innovations originally
so rare from the discussion the previous
chapter
one might guess that it was because the
tribes or families
in which the people were living were
static societies
in which any noticeable innovation would
reduce one's status and hence
presumably one's eligibility to mate so
how does one gain status
specifically by exercising more
creativity than anyone else
without becoming noticeable as a taboo
violator pausing there because we're
about to get to david deutsch's
brilliant
unique discovery suggestion here but i
think it's a um
it is the best explanation i've heard of
so just to tie this up as we get to the
solution the problem
the problem is we have creative people
in the past
these creative people in the past have
the capacity to innovate
but they're not innovating in any way we
have any evidence for whatsoever
they haven't innovated much so what are
they using their creativity for
they can't be using it in order to
change things too much
because these people would have existed
in a static society and then you'll be
seen
as a taboo violator you'll be seen
as someone who needs to be cast out of
such a society you're unholy
or unworthy in some way
because you're not adhering to the
strictures of the society the customs
and traditions
so what is david deutsch as david
deutscher's
solution to this he says quote
i think there is only one way it is to
enact the society's means
more faithfully than the norm to display
exceptional conformity
and obedience to refrain exceptionally
well from innovation
a static society has no choice but to
reward that sort of conspicuousness
so can enhance creativity help one to be
less innovative than other people
that turns out to be a pivotal question
to which i shall return below
but first i must address a second puzzle
okay pausing there so isn't that
isn't that great you know the this whole
idea which i did
steal the thunder from in a previous
episode but what we're saying here is
what david's saying here is that
innovation the capacity to innovate
can be used to more faithfully entrench
the existing norms so if you and
it still happens today we know these
kind of cultures and in fact we
probably live in a version in some ways
of these cultures people who
more faithfully adhere to the traditions
and cultures that they find themselves
in because that gives them
status in such a society so if your
society is making no progress
and is just going through rituals of a
kind religious rituals of a kind
and not improving anything the way to
stand out in such a society because you
don't want to stand out
by doing something new and creative it's
to
do the thing that everyone else is doing
but better than they're doing it
okay so if you have to you know mold
your hair in a particular way if you
mold your hair
in a way that's just like that but
better
without even a hair out of place where
someone else had one hair out of place
and you have none
then you're doing even better okay let's
go back to the book
his second puzzle david's second puzzle
for this chapter
and it's subtitled how do you replicate
a meaning in david writes meme
replication is often characterized
for example by blackmore as imitation
but that cannot be so a meme is an idea
and we cannot observe ideas inside other
people's brains
nor do we have the hardware to download
them from one brain to another like
computer programs
nor to replicate them like dna molecules
so we cannot literally copy or imitate
memes the only access we have to their
content is through their holders
behaviour
including their speech and consequences
of their behaviour such as their writing
meme replication always follows this
pattern one observes the holder's
behavior
directly or indirectly then later
sometimes immediately sometimes after
years of such
observation memes from the holders
brains are present
in one's own brain but how do they get
there
it looks a bit like induction does it
not but induction is impossible
the process often seems to involve
imitating the holders
for instance we learn words by imitating
their sounds we learn how to wave by
being waved to and imitating what we see
thus outwardly and even to our own
introspection we appear to be copying
aspects of what other people do
and remembering what they say and right
this common sense misconception is even
corroborated by the fact that our
species closest living relatives
the great apes also have a much more
limited but nevertheless striking
ability to imitate but as i shall
explain
the truth is that imitating people's
actions and remembering their utterances
could not possibly be the basis of human
meme replication
in reality those play only a small and
for the most part
in a central role meme acquisition comes
so naturally to us
that it is hard to see what a miraculous
process it is
or what is really happening it is
especially hard to see where the
knowledge
is coming from there is a great deal of
in even the simplest of human memes when
we learn to wave
we learn not only the gesture but also
which aspects of the situation
made it appropriate to wave and how and
to whom
we are not told most of this yet we
learn it anyway
similarly when we learn a word we also
learn its meaning
including highly inexplicit subtleties
how do we acquire that knowledge
not by imitating the holders
paul said just my reflection so he's
really setting this up really well
and thoroughgoing porpyrians may have
guessed
the answer well they've probably read
the book anyway if they're listening to
this
but the fact is that we manage to
gain this knowledge from people
we gain means we understand for example
what waving is in what situations you do
the waving
and the kind of inexplicit knowledge
that a wave
can convey you know if i'm doing this
then
that has a certain amount of inexplicit
knowledge in it um
you know i sort of look a bit awkward
doing that
but to try and explain exactly how i
look in words
it's not you know my eyes are a little
bit but if i'm like yeah
you know i can do all sorts of different
waves can't i and each of them
might have a different look on my face
and might be waving my hand faster or
slower and it has
and if you had to describe that to
someone later on you might say brett was
waving in a strange way well i don't
really know but
you can't we kind of both know you know
when you're waving to someone whether
it's a genuine wave where it's an
awkward wave whether it's a shy
wave where it's an excited wave etc etc
etc
but that's what david means by
inexplicit stuff and you know the
situations where you
should and shouldn't do the kind of
waving
and what the what you're conveying it
can convey a whole lot of
a whole lot of knowledge can be conveyed
by a wave
um you can wave people away you can wave
to someone in such a way as to say hi i
acknowledge you over there on the other
side of the street but i
don't want to talk to you right now i'm
too busy okay for example there's lots
of things that
simple gestures and simple words and so
on there's lots of meaning that can be
contained
within these things the inexplicit as
well as the explicit knowledge that
happens to be there
okay so that's what david's setting up
how do we
acquire the knowledge he's just asked
and he said not by imitating the holders
now he's going to talk about popper and
this is just such a wonderful story
so back to the book and david writes
quote
papa used to begin his lecture course on
the philosophy of science by asking the
students simply to
observe then he would wait in silence
for one of them to ask
what they were supposed to observe this
was his way of demonstrating
one of the many flaws in the empiricism
that is still part of common sense today
so he would explain to them that
scientific observation
is impossible without pre-existing
knowledge about what to look at
what to look for how to look and how to
interpret what one sees
and it would explain that therefore
theory has to come first
it has to be conjectured not derived
papa could have made the same point by
asking his audience to
imitate rather than to merely observe
the logic would have been the same
under what explanatory theory should
they imitate
whom should they imitate poppa in that
case
should they walk to the podium push him
out of the way and stand where he had
been standing if not
should they at least try to face the
rear of the room to imitate where he was
facing
should they imitate his heavy austrian
accent or should they speak in their
normal voices because
he was speaking in his normal voice or
should they do nothing special at the
time but merely include such
demonstrations in their lectures when
they themselves became professors of
philosophy
there are infinitely many possible
interpretations of
imitate popper each defining a different
behavior for the imitator
many of these ways would look very
different from each other each way
corresponds to a different theory of
what ideas in popper's mind
were causing the observed behavior so
there is no such thing as
just imitating the behaviour still less
therefore
can one discover those ideas by
imitating it one needs to know the ideas
before one can imitate the behaviour so
imitating behavior cannot be
how we acquire memes the hypothetical
genes that caused meme replication by
imitation
would also have to specify whom to
imitate blackmore for instance suggests
the criterion maybe
imitate the best imitators but this is
impossible for the same reason
one can only judge how well someone is
imitating if someone already knows who
has guessed what
which aspect of behaviour and whose they
are imitating
and which of the circumstances they are
taking into account and how
the same holds if the behavior consists
of stating the means
as popper remarked it is impossible to
speak in such a way
that you cannot be misunderstood
one can only state the explicit content
which is insufficient to define the
meaning of a meme
or anything else even the most explicit
of means such as laws
have inexplicit content without which
they cannot be enacted
for example many laws refer to what is
reasonable but no one can define that
attribute
accurately enough for say a person from
a different culture to be able to apply
the definition in judging a criminal
case hence we certainly do not learn
what reasonable means by hearing its
meaning stated
but we do learn it and the versions of
it that are learned by people in the
same
culture are sufficiently close for laws
based on it
to be practicable in any case as i
remarked in the previous chapter we do
not explicitly know
the rules by which we behave we know the
rules meanings and patterns of speech of
our native language
largely inexplicitly yet we pass its
rules on with remarkable fidelity to the
next generation including the ability
to apply them in situations the new
holder has never experienced
and including patterns of speech that
people explicitly try to prevent
the next generation from replicating
pause there just my uh little comment
there
yes this is a remarkable thing about
language acquisition
met the many people who have been
involved in let's say language
teaching have always been fascinated by
and that is that every english speaker
almost every english speaker
inexplicitly knows the rules of english
grammar
when you hear a grammatically incorrect
sentence almost everyone can recognize
it
however no it's not necessarily the case
that everyone can explain
what the error might be you know to
someone speaking english learning to
speak english from another culture
you might you know be entertaining them
in your house and you might say
have you had a drink yet and they might
say in a response i have a drink
and you don't know what they mean do
they mean they have had a drink
which is the past perfect tense
do they mean they want to have a drink i
would like to have a drink
but they've said i have a drink in
response to your question have you had a
drink whereas a
native english speaker will say no i
have not had a drink or yes i have had a
drink they inexplicitly know
that this is the way in which you're
supposed to respond but a non-native
english speaker who's struggling to
understand the language doesn't know the
grammar
very well and so english teachers
people who learn to be english teachers
often have to learn explicitly
what the rules of grammar happen to be
just so they can explain it to
the language learning you know this is
the past perfect tense and this is just
the past simple tense
and this is the present tense and so on
they might have to learn these things
um so that they can make the inexplicit
explicit in some cases
making the inexplicit explicit is
helpful for learning sometimes it might
not be helpful learning you know
language
learning and teaching is a certainly a
fraught area i did it for
quite a while and this issue about
how we pass on these rules with
remarkable fidelity to the next
generation
is is can be a great mystery you know
with all the things about
pronunciation of words you know the
sounds that certain things
they become deeply ingrained over time
and some people just appear to have
better ears for learning
languages i know i'm terrible if the
language starts to deviate too much from
the typical sounds that an english
speaker
will speak i seem not to be able to
get my mouth in the right position
because there's a in fact that goes into
phonetics there's a
huge amount of inexplicit content in
where your tongue actually has to be
when you make certain sounds in certain
other cultures
i've tried to learn korean i'm
absolutely terrible at it because the
tongue has to be in different places it
has to be
closer or further away from the teeth
than what we use in english
and so this can be hard because koreans
of course naturally inexplicit knowledge
know where the
the tongue happens to be the fact that
the entire alphabet in korean
interestingly enough
um is uh it's an alphabet kind of like
english is except the characters
some of the characters represent the
position of the tongue in the mouth
which is really
cool and interesting anyway way off
topic let's go back to the book
and david writes the real situation is
that people need
inexplicit knowledge to understand laws
and other explicit statements not vice
versa
philosophers and psychologists work hard
to discover and to make explicit the
assumptions that our culture tacitly
makes
about social institutions human nature
right and wrong time and space intention
causality freedom necessity and so on
but we do not acquire those assumptions
by reading the results of such research
it is entirely the other way around if
behavior is impossible to imitate
without prior knowledge of the theory
causing the behavior
how is it that apes famously can ape
they have memes they can learn a new way
of opening a nut by watching another ape
that already knows that way
how is it that apes are not confused by
the infinite ambiguity of what it means
to imitate
even parrots famously parrot they can
commit to memory dozens of sounds that
they have heard and repeat them later
how do they cope with the ambiguity of
which sounds to imitate
and when to repeat them they cope with
it by knowing the relevant inexplicit
theories in advance
or rather their genes know them
evolution is built into the genes of a
parrot
an implicit definition of what imitating
means to them
to them it means recording sequences of
sounds that meet
some inborn criterion and later
replaying them under conditions that
meet
some other inborn criterion an
interesting fact follows about parrot
psychology
the parent's brain must also contain a
translation system that analyzes
incoming nerve signals from the ears
and generates outgoing ones that will
cause the parrot's vocal cords to play
the same sounds
that translation requires some quite
sophisticated computation
which is encoded in genes not memes it
is thought
to be achieved in part by a system based
on mirror neurons
these are neurons that fire when an
animal performs a given action
and also when the animal perceives the
same action being performed by another
these neurons have been identified
experimentally in animals that have the
capacity to imitate
scientists who believe that human meme
replication
is a sophisticated form of imitation
tend to believe that mirror neurons
are a key to understanding all sorts of
functions of the human mind
unfortunately that cannot possibly be so
and i'll skip the next little bit and
because david talks about
um parroting you know what what a parrot
does
and the fact that a parrot will parrot
anything it will parrot a
dog bark it'll parrot a ringing doorbell
um
a parrot seems to have no choice
about the sound that it makes in fact um
i might put up a
more amazing more amazing than a parrot
i have to say it's the australian bird
the liar bird and if you've never heard
the lyre bird before
it is far more impressive than any
parrot you'll ever hear the lyre
will imitate anything it will entertain
anything and one of the most
amazing things that it's imitated is an
environmentalist love to use this one
of course um is the the
the imitation of a liar bird of a
chainsaw
a chainsaw the chainsaw just coming to
chop down its habitat
i shouldn't laugh about that you know
the live birds are fine in australia
they're not they're not
going extinct or endangered or anything
we've got lots of forests lots of bush
land but
yes the the the um the liability will
imitate it'll imitate camera sounds
i'll play the clip if i can find the
clip and i'll put it up here
and that's a prayer
[Applause]
moving on from the liar bird back to the
book after skipping a little bit and
david writes
now imagine that a parrot had been
present at poppa's lectures and learned
to parrot some of poppa's favorite
sentences
it would in a sense have imitated some
of papa's ideas in principle
an interested student could later learn
the ideas by listening to the parrot
but the parrot would merely be
transmitting those memes from one place
to another which is no more than the air
in lecture theater does
the parrot could not be said to have
acquired the means because it would be
reproducing
only some of the countless behaviors
that they could produce
the parrot's subsequent behaviour as a
result of having learned the sounds by
heart such as
its responses to questions would not
resemble poppers the sound of the meme
would be there but its meaning would not
and it is the meaning the knowledge that
is the replicator
okay then david talks about how the fact
that the parrot is not
oblivious to the sounds it doesn't
indiscriminately
record things like a recorder like an
electronic recorder will record
everything
the parrot is clearly only recording
specific things and then
david goes on to talk about apes and
some of uh aping aping can be so
complicated
that it appears as if it's learning
so for example if one ape learns to
crack a nut
better than another ape then the other
eight can
tend to learn from the the first type
that has improved
something now the the kicker to this to
kick it to the fact that okay an
ape can learn to use a tool and people
are
unaccountably impressed by the kind of
tool use
that goes on among some animals now we
have
crows in australia as well i'm
mentioning another australian and i
think crows exist around the world but
the tool use of the crow
is often cited as a particularly
impressive example of
intelligence in the lower species
david writes how such activities may
seem to depend upon explanation
on understanding how and why why each
action
that can be complicated making a tool or
cracking a nut
in in various contexts by an ape seems
to be
like learning it seems to be like
explanatory knowledge
but as he says here quote in a
remarkable series of observational
and theoretical studies the evolutionary
psychologist and animal behavior
researcher
richard byrne has shown they
the apes achieve this by a process that
he calls
behavior passing which is analogous to
the grammatical analysis or passing of
human speech or computer programs
and i won't i think i'm just going to
encourage people to go and read the book
rather than
me reading it out which seems strange i
mean i'm kind of taking out the punch
line of this but
there is this thing called behavior
passing where
it's not like conjecture
and refutation it is instead
how there's already a repertoire of
possible behaviors that an ape
can undertake and within these this
repertoire
it's like a library of possible
different things
that this creature can undertake then
they can be
combined in different ways in order to
do something that
is might not have been encountered
before by any members of those species
and as david says of this behavior
passing and it's worth looking out
behavior passing is a very inefficient
method requiring
a lot of watching of behaviors that a
human could mimic
almost immediately by understanding
their purpose also it allows only a few
fixed options for connecting the
behaviors together
so only relatively simple memes can be
replicated
apes can only copy certain individual
actions instantly
the ones of which they have pre-existing
knowledge through their mirrored neuron
system
but it takes them years to learn a
repertoire of memes that involve
combinations of actions okay and then
i'm skipping
yet more because i just want to get to
the section about how
humans are different they're not just
imitating behavior
as an ape would or as a parrot would
okay we're categorically different
how because david says quote
human beings acquiring human memes are
doing something
profoundly different when an audience is
watching a lecture
or a child is learning a language their
problem is almost the opposite of that
of parroting or aping
the meaning of the behavior that they
are observing is precisely what they are
striving to discover
and do not know in advance the actions
themselves and even the logic of how
they are connected
are largely secondary and are often
entirely forgotten afterwards
for example as adults we remember few of
the actual sentences
from which we learn to speak if a parent
had copied
snatches of popper's voice at a lecture
it would certainly have copied them
with his austrian accent parrots are
incapable
of copying and utterance without its
accent
but a human student might well be unable
to copy it with
the accent in fact a student might well
acquire a complex meme at a lecture
without being able to repeat a single
sentence spoken by the lecturer even
immediately afterwards in such a case
the student has replicated the meaning
which is the whole content
of the meme without imitating any
actions at all
as i said imitation is not at the heart
of human meme replication okay so i'm
going to pause and i'm going to
end there today maybe a little bit
shorter than normal but i actually have
made
i made three podcast episodes today
there's one out there
which is just me talking to cameron not
reading about
aliens one there which is a more
carefully considered
piece about cosmology
and the effect on economics that
cosmology has and finally this one today
so it's been a bit of my voice is
starting to go
so um if you've enjoyed this if you
enjoyed any of my other podcasts please
consider
becoming a patreon supporter it's
very valuable to me uh very heartening
that i've i've
increased my number of supporters i'm up
over 20 now which is um
very heartening for me um i'm very much
enjoying doing this
and we'll have a few more episodes for
this chapter
and move on to the next chapter
unsustainable which will be
a an exciting a very exciting trip not
to say this isn't exciting we're getting
right into this and we're taking our
time getting through it but um
unsustainable will be a
i don't want to say controversial but
it'll be a fun chapter when we do
eventually get there
thank you again to everyone who's
watching everyone who's listening
and to all of my patreon subscribers
until next time bye